ciris_engine/registries/README.md, before:

# Service Registry System

The CIRIS Agent service registry provides a unified, resilient system for managing services across handlers with automatic fallback, circuit breaker patterns, and priority-based selection.

## Architecture

### Core Components

1. **ServiceRegistry** - Central registry for all services
2. **CircuitBreaker** - Prevents cascading failures
3. **Priority System** - Determines service selection order
4. **Protocol Contracts** - Type-safe service interfaces

### Service Types

- **CommunicationService** - CLI, API, Discord (TODO: Veilid)
- **WiseAuthorityService** - CIRISNode, CLI, API, Discord
- **MemoryService** - Local graph (TODO: Origintrail, API(GraphQL), Veilid)
- **ToolService** - CLI, Discord (TODO: API, Veilid)

## Runtime Integration

### Base CIRISRuntime Setup

The base `CIRISRuntime` automatically:
1. Initializes the service registry
2. Registers core services (memory, etc.)
3. Passes registry to all handlers via `ActionHandlerDependencies`

### Subclass Extension Example

```python
# ciris_engine/runtime/discord_runtime.py
class DiscordRuntime(CIRISRuntime):
    async def _register_core_services(self):
        """Extend core service registration with Discord-specific services"""
        # Call parent to register memory service
        await super()._register_core_services()
        
        # Register Discord as primary communication service
        if self.discord_adapter:
            self.service_registry.register(
                handler="SpeakHandler",
                service_type="communication", 
                provider=self.discord_adapter,
                priority=Priority.HIGH,
                capabilities=["send_message", "fetch_messages", "discord"]
            )
            
            # Also register for other handlers that need communication
            for handler in ["ObserveHandler", "ToolHandler"]:
                self.service_registry.register(
                    handler=handler,
                    service_type="communication",
                    provider=self.discord_adapter,
                    priority=Priority.HIGH,
                    capabilities=["send_message", "fetch_messages"]
                )
        
        # Register CIRISNode as WA service
        if self.cirisnode_client:
            for handler in ["DeferHandler", "SpeakHandler"]:
                self.service_registry.register(
                    handler=handler,
                    service_type="wise_authority",
                    provider=self.cirisnode_client, 
                    priority=Priority.NORMAL,
                    capabilities=["request_guidance", "submit_deferral"]
                )
        
        # Register fallback communication service (if available)
        if self.veilid_adapter:
            self.service_registry.register(
                handler="SpeakHandler",
                service_type="communication",
                provider=self.veilid_adapter,
                priority=Priority.NORMAL,  # Lower priority than Discord
                capabilities=["send_message", "veilid"]
            )
```

## Handler Usage

### Updated Handler Pattern

Handlers now use the service registry through the base class methods:

```python
class SpeakHandler(BaseActionHandler):
    async def handle(self, result, thought, dispatch_context):
        # Get best available communication service
        comm_service = await self.get_communication_service()
        
        if comm_service:
            success = await comm_service.send_message(channel_id, content)
            if success:
                await self._audit_log(HandlerActionType.SPEAK, dispatch_context, 
                                    {"status": "success", "service": type(comm_service).__name__})
            else:
                # Registry automatically tries fallback services
                await self._audit_log(HandlerActionType.SPEAK, dispatch_context,
                                    {"status": "failed", "service": type(comm_service).__name__})
        else:
            # log and exit
            return 1
```

### Available Service Methods

The `BaseActionHandler` provides these convenience methods:

```python
# Communication services
comm_service = await self.get_communication_service()

# WA services  
wa_service = await self.get_wa_service()

# Memory services
memory_service = await self.get_memory_service()

# Tool services
tool_service = await self.get_tool_service()

# Generic service access
service = await self.get_service("service_type", required_capabilities=["capability"])
```

## Circuit Breaker Integration

The registry automatically handles service failures:

1. **Failure Tracking** - Services that fail have their circuit breaker failure count incremented
2. **Automatic Cutoff** - After N failures, the service is temporarily disabled
3. **Recovery Testing** - After a timeout, the service is retested with limited requests
4. **Fallback Activation** - Lower priority services are automatically tried

## Multi-Service Sink

The `MultiServiceActionSink` provides unified action processing:

```python
# Create and start the sink
sink = MultiServiceActionSink(service_registry=registry)
await sink.start()

# Send actions via convenience methods
await sink.send_message("SpeakHandler", channel_id, "Hello world!")
await sink.submit_deferral("DeferHandler", thought_id, "Need more context")
await sink.execute_tool("ToolHandler", "search", {"query": "example"})

# Or queue actions directly
action = SendMessageAction(
    handler_name="SpeakHandler",
    metadata={},
    channel_id=channel_id,
    content="Direct action message"
)
await sink.enqueue_action(action)
```

## Migration Guide

### For Existing Handlers

1. **Add service registry calls** - Use `get_*_service()` methods for new features
2. **Update error handling** - Registry provides automatic fallback

### For Runtime Implementations

1. **Extend `_register_core_services()`** - Add your adapter registrations
2. **Use standard protocols** - Implement `CommunicationService`, etc.
3. **Set priorities appropriately** - Higher priority services are tried first

## Benefits

1. **Automatic Fallback** - No manual fallback logic needed
2. **Circuit Breaker Protection** - Prevents cascading failures  
3. **Type Safety** - Protocol contracts ensure correct usage
4. **Backward Compatibility** - Existing code continues to work
5. **Centralized Configuration** - All service routing in one place
6. **Testability** - Easy to mock services for testing

## Performance

- **Service Selection**: O(log n) for sorted priority lists
- **Circuit Breaker**: O(1) state checks
- **Registry Lookup**: O(1) hash map access
- **Memory Overhead**: Minimal, stores references only

The registry is designed for high-throughput production use with minimal latency impact.

Commit message:

feat: ensure runtime waits for service readiness

ciris_engine/registries/README.md, after:

# Service Registry System

The CIRIS Agent service registry provides a unified, resilient system for managing services across handlers with automatic fallback, circuit breaker patterns, and priority-based selection.

## Architecture

### Core Components

1. **ServiceRegistry** - Central registry for all services
2. **CircuitBreaker** - Prevents cascading failures
3. **Priority System** - Determines service selection order
4. **Protocol Contracts** - Type-safe service interfaces

### Service Types

- **CommunicationService** - CLI, API, Discord (TODO: Veilid)
- **WiseAuthorityService** - CIRISNode, CLI, API, Discord
- **MemoryService** - Local graph (TODO: Origintrail, API(GraphQL), Veilid)
- **ToolService** - CLI, Discord (TODO: API, Veilid)

## Runtime Integration

### Base CIRISRuntime Setup

The base `CIRISRuntime` automatically:
1. Initializes the service registry
2. Registers core services (memory, etc.)
3. Passes registry to all handlers via `ActionHandlerDependencies`
4. Waits for required services to be registered via `ServiceRegistry.wait_ready`

### Subclass Extension Example

```python
# ciris_engine/runtime/discord_runtime.py
class DiscordRuntime(CIRISRuntime):
    async def _register_core_services(self):
        """Extend core service registration with Discord-specific services"""
        # Call parent to register memory service
        await super()._register_core_services()
        
        # Register Discord as primary communication service
        if self.discord_adapter:
            self.service_registry.register(
                handler="SpeakHandler",
                service_type="communication", 
                provider=self.discord_adapter,
                priority=Priority.HIGH,
                capabilities=["send_message", "fetch_messages", "discord"]
            )
            
            # Also register for other handlers that need communication
            for handler in ["ObserveHandler", "ToolHandler"]:
                self.service_registry.register(
                    handler=handler,
                    service_type="communication",
                    provider=self.discord_adapter,
                    priority=Priority.HIGH,
                    capabilities=["send_message", "fetch_messages"]
                )
        
        # Register CIRISNode as WA service
        if self.cirisnode_client:
            for handler in ["DeferHandler", "SpeakHandler"]:
                self.service_registry.register(
                    handler=handler,
                    service_type="wise_authority",
                    provider=self.cirisnode_client, 
                    priority=Priority.NORMAL,
                    capabilities=["request_guidance", "submit_deferral"]
                )
        
        # Register fallback communication service (if available)
        if self.veilid_adapter:
            self.service_registry.register(
                handler="SpeakHandler",
                service_type="communication",
                provider=self.veilid_adapter,
                priority=Priority.NORMAL,  # Lower priority than Discord
                capabilities=["send_message", "veilid"]
            )
```

## Handler Usage

### Updated Handler Pattern

Handlers now use the service registry through the base class methods:

```python
class SpeakHandler(BaseActionHandler):
    async def handle(self, result, thought, dispatch_context):
        # Get best available communication service
        comm_service = await self.get_communication_service()
        
        if comm_service:
            success = await comm_service.send_message(channel_id, content)
            if success:
                await self._audit_log(HandlerActionType.SPEAK, dispatch_context, 
                                    {"status": "success", "service": type(comm_service).__name__})
            else:
                # Registry automatically tries fallback services
                await self._audit_log(HandlerActionType.SPEAK, dispatch_context,
                                    {"status": "failed", "service": type(comm_service).__name__})
        else:
            # log and exit
            return 1
```

### Available Service Methods

The `BaseActionHandler` provides these convenience methods:

```python
# Communication services
comm_service = await self.get_communication_service()

# WA services  
wa_service = await self.get_wa_service()

# Memory services
memory_service = await self.get_memory_service()

# Tool services
tool_service = await self.get_tool_service()

# Generic service access
service = await self.get_service("service_type", required_capabilities=["capability"])
```

### Waiting for Services

Before handlers start processing, runtimes call `ServiceRegistry.wait_ready()`
to ensure required service types are registered. The default timeout is 30
seconds. If some services are still missing when the timeout expires, an error
is logged and processing continues with any available services.

## Circuit Breaker Integration

The registry automatically handles service failures:

1. **Failure Tracking** - Services that fail have their circuit breaker failure count incremented
2. **Automatic Cutoff** - After N failures, the service is temporarily disabled
3. **Recovery Testing** - After a timeout, the service is retested with limited requests
4. **Fallback Activation** - Lower priority services are automatically tried

## Multi-Service Sink

The `MultiServiceActionSink` provides unified action processing:

```python
# Create and start the sink
sink = MultiServiceActionSink(service_registry=registry)
await sink.start()

# Send actions via convenience methods
await sink.send_message("SpeakHandler", channel_id, "Hello world!")
await sink.submit_deferral("DeferHandler", thought_id, "Need more context")
await sink.execute_tool("ToolHandler", "search", {"query": "example"})

# Or queue actions directly
action = SendMessageAction(
    handler_name="SpeakHandler",
    metadata={},
    channel_id=channel_id,
    content="Direct action message"
)
await sink.enqueue_action(action)
```

## Migration Guide

### For Existing Handlers

1. **Add service registry calls** - Use `get_*_service()` methods for new features
2. **Update error handling** - Registry provides automatic fallback

### For Runtime Implementations

1. **Extend `_register_core_services()`** - Add your adapter registrations
2. **Use standard protocols** - Implement `CommunicationService`, etc.
3. **Set priorities appropriately** - Higher priority services are tried first

## Benefits

1. **Automatic Fallback** - No manual fallback logic needed
2. **Circuit Breaker Protection** - Prevents cascading failures  
3. **Type Safety** - Protocol contracts ensure correct usage
4. **Backward Compatibility** - Existing code continues to work
5. **Centralized Configuration** - All service routing in one place
6. **Testability** - Easy to mock services for testing

## Performance

- **Service Selection**: O(log n) for sorted priority lists
- **Circuit Breaker**: O(1) state checks
- **Registry Lookup**: O(1) hash map access
- **Memory Overhead**: Minimal, stores references only

The registry is designed for high-throughput production use with minimal latency impact.
